---
layout: post
title:  "Week 1: HTML Scavenger Hunt"
date:   2016-12-12 17:00:00 -0500
categories: html
---

## TLDR;

* The most important thing you can learn as a coder is how to research
* Very rarely will you find an unsolved problem. Keep digging and see what
    others have done before you.

## Finding what you need

Last week we covered some of the basics of HTML, such as how to make a basic
page and add some content. This week, we are going to continue with adding
content to your webpage, but with a twist! Instead of telling you directly, I am
going to show you how you would find the information on your own. Researching
is **the** most important skill in tech (and actually most careers). If you can
craft the right search query, you can find out how to do almost anything.

Let's start simple. Let's say I wanted to learn how to add a list to my webpage.
What search term should I use? Well, I know web pages are written in HTML, so
that is a good start. Plus I know I want to show a list. Let's try searching
"html list." You probably could have guessed that, but it is important to note
the logic that lead to that search query. The main guidelines I use to find what
I am looking for is as follows:

* *Start with what you are trying to do.* Even if it is just typing "how to ..."
    it is a good start
* *Once you find something, try it out.* Found a snippet of code you think might
    help? Add it your project or an empty one and see what happens.
* *Note what you learned.* Did the thing you found or tried get you closer to
    your goal? This included knowing what not to do. Write that down or at least
    make a mental note.
* *If one query doesn't work, try another one.* Sometimes it takes multiple
    attempts to find what you need. Don't give up! Every time you read another
    tutorial or code snippet on a forum, you are getting smarter.

One of the coolest things about coding is that a lot of the information is out
there waiting for you. Almost any problem you are trying to overcome or language
you are trying to learn has been worked on/learned by thousands of people before
you. That means almost any question you have has already been answered
somewhere. Once in a while you will bump up against a problem no one else has
dealt with, but the vast majority of the time I guarantee someone has already
solved the problem and explained their solution online.


## Exercise: Finish the content

Remember the site you started making last week? We are going to continue working
on it. This time, we have a specific goal in mind: creating your digital resume.
When you tell people you know how to code, it really helps to show them some
examples. We are going to start with a really basic website that gives your
name, contact information, a brief bio, and a list of projects you have worked
on. This is our first major project, so when it comes time for the project list
put in things you want to learn, such as making a game or programming a mobile
app. Don't worry too much about making the website look good, that will be next
week's lesson!

The website needs to have the following:

* A page title contained in a header
* A title displayed in the heading of the page (not the body, but within the
    `<head>` tag)
* A bulleted list of projects you want to work on
* A separate biography page with a link to from and to the home page
* At least one picture (it can be of you or something you like, we will update
    it in next week's lesson)
* Your favorite quote
* A link to your email
* One special character
* A font different from the default
* Sub-headings for each section

Want to see an example page? [Click here!](/assets/resume.html)
