---
layout: post
title:  "Week 2: More HTML & CSS"
date:   2017-01-11 08:00:00 -0500
categories: html css
---

## TLDR;

* CSS makes websites pretty while keeping the HTML code clean.
* It controls everything from color to how different HTML elements interact
  webpage to look good quickly without writing everything from scratch.

## CSS &amp; Style

CSS, or cascading style sheets, are what give a webpage life and character.
It adds flair and helps make your site look unique. If you remember from last
week, CSS is a separate language from HTML for styling HTML pages. As a result,
there are two major ways to use CSS:

1. Put the style elements inline are part of the `style` attribute
2. Have an external CSS file containing all the styles and style rules.

We did the first last week, but generally speaking, it is best to avoid inline
styles. Why? Because the real power of CSS is being able to apply a look and
feel consistently throughout a website. Do you really want to manually explain
the style of an article header every time you write an article? No! So we use
style rules to define these things. Here are the style rules we used last week:

```html
<body style="background-color: #aa67db; color: #42f46e">
```
As you can see, the syntax is very similar to the attribute syntax in HTML,
except instead of using an equals sign, we are using a colon. Also notice the
semi-colon dividing the two rules. CSS uses semi-colons at the end of each and
every line to tell the computer it is done with that style rule. Below is the
same style rule, but defined in an external file:

```css
body {
  background-color: #aa67db;
  color: #42f46e;
}
```

Let's break that down. First is `body`, which tells the computer where the
style rules apply. In this case, the rule applies to everything inside of the
body tags (the entire page). The next line tells the computer to set the
background color to <span style='color: #aa67db'>&#x25A3;</span> and the line
after that changes the text color to
<span style='color: #42f46e'>&#x25A3;</span>. The last line closes the style
rule with a closing bracket. The same way that html tags must be closed with
closing tags, each style rule must be closed with a closing bracket.

Rules can be applied to any element within a page. For example, if you wanted to
change the font and size of a `h1` tag, it would look something like:

```css
h1 {
  font-family: helvetica, sans-serif;
  font-size: 16pt;
}
```

The `font-family` rule changes the font while the `font-size` rule changes the
size. One thing to note here is that websites don't think about fonts the same
way Microsoft Word or other word processors do. The browser either needs to know
the font you are asking for, or have a link to it in the page's header. Below
are some great resources regarding fonts on the web, but be warned, it can be
quite a rabbit hole!

* [Fonts (almost) any browser can use](http://www.w3schools.com/cssref/css_websafe_fonts.asp)
* [Google Fonts - a TON of free fonts ready for you to import into any project](https://fonts.google.com/)

There are more rules in CSS than it makes sense to list here. For a more
complete reference of all the available rules and how to use them, look at
[CSS reference pages at w3schools](http://www.w3schools.com/cssref/default.asp).

## CSS &amp; Naming

Now, the real power of CSS is not just in what rules are available, but also
how you can refer to them. Remember in the last section when I mentioned that
you can assign a rule to any HTML tag and its contents? You can also refer to
specific parts/items in your page using two HTML attributes you may have seen
already, but didn't have a lot of use until working with CSS. These two
attributes are `id` and `class`. `id` always refers to a single element on a
page, giving it a name you can refer to in CSS (and later on in JavaScript).
An element can only ever have one `id` and an `id` can only be used once on a
page. For example, if you were writing a blog and wanted to mark off a section
to be the main content, you could do it like this:

```html
<p id='main-content'>
   <!-- ... some brilliant article -->
</p>
```
The `id` attribute there gives the paragraph tag an id of `main-content`. To
make a CSS style rule that applies to to that tag and its contents (and only
that tag and its contents) then you would write:

```css
#main-content {
  /* very pretty rules */
}
```

The hashtag before the id name tells CSS that you are defining a rule for an id.
You will notice the `/* ... */` in the code snippet above. That tells CSS that
the content between the two slashes is a comment and should not be considered
code.

`class` is similar to `id`, but is much more flexible. While a tag can only have
one id, a tag can have multiple classes. Each class is separated with a space
in the attribute:

```html
<p class='main-content fun silly'>
  <!-- more amazing content -->
</p>
```

The tag above has the classes `main-content`, `fun`, and `silly`. Also, classes
can be applied to as many elements as you want, so they are infinitely reusable
and combinable. Classes are the main tool you will use to give your websites a
consistent look and feel, so it is really important you understand them. You
create a CSS rule for a class similarly to how you create a CSS rule for an id,
except you use a period instead of a hashtag, like below:

```css
.main-content {
  /* wicked awesome styling */
}
```

The rule above would apply to element that has the class `main-content`.

## Bringing it Together

So, up until now I have just mentioned the basic structure of CSS rules and how
to define them. However, you still need to tell your webpage where to look
before any of the rules get applied. Remember the `<head>` tag? If not, that is
okay. The `<head>` tag basically tells the browser different meta-data about the
web page and always goes before the body tag. You may have seen this in
different examples online. Well, one such piece of meta-data is where any CSS
files are located (all CSS files end in `.css`). As with images, you can either
use a full URL (including http) or a path relative to the file you are
referencing. It is common to have a separate folder with all your CSS files in
it just off the main folder of your site. To actually link the CSS to the
HTML page, you use a `<link>` tag. Below is a basic example of attaching an
external CSS file named `styles.css` in a subfolder called `css` to a webpage:

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/styles.css">
  </head>
  <body>
    <!-- the actual content of your page -->
  </body>
</html>

```

Don't worry if that doesn't make a whole lot of sense. The main thing to know
is that you can copy-and-paste the head and link tags as shown above and simply
replace the `href` attribute with location of your CSS file. If you are curious
about learning more how this works, or other ways to add CSS to your webpage,
take a look at the w3schools page [here](http://www.w3schools.com/css/css_howto.asp).
We will go over the head tag in more detail next week when we talk about more
advanced CSS topics.

## Exercise: Make your site pretty!

CSS styles and style-rules can get infinitely more complicated, but you now know
the basic rules. Using the snippets and links in this article, go back to the
website you make in week 1 and apply different CSS rules to the page to make it
look good to you. If you can, play with some style-rules not mentioned on this
page.
