---
layout: post
title:  "Week 1: More HTML & CSS"
date:   2016-12-07 08:00:00 -0500
categories: html css python
---

## TLDR;

* Page layout is important for giving your website body
* CSS makes websites pretty while keeping the HTML code clean.
* Controls everything from color to how different HTML elements interact
* Bootstrap is a super useful CSS framework that is super useful for getting a
  webpage to look good quickly without writing everything from scratch.

## CSS

CSS, or cascading style sheets, are what give a webpage life and character.
It adds flair and helps make your site look unique. If you remember from last
week, CSS is a separate language from HTML for styling HTML pages. As a result,
there are two major ways to use CSS:

1. Put the style elements inline are part of the `style` attribute
2. Have an external CSS file containing all the styles and style rules.

We did the first last week, but generally speaking, it is best to avoid inline
styles. Why? Because the real power of CSS is being able to apply a look and
feel consistently throughout a website. Do you really want to manually explain
the style of an article header every time you write an article? No! So we use
style rules to define these things. Here are the style rules we used last week:

```html
<body style="background-color: #aa67db; color: #42f46e">
```
As you can see, the syntax is very similar to the attribute syntax in HTML,
except instead of using an equals sign, we are using a colon. Also notice the
semi-colon dividing the two rules. CSS uses semi-colons at the end of each and
every line to tell the computer it is done with that style rule. Below is the
same style rule, but defined in an external file:

```css
body {
  background-color: #aa67db;
  color: #42f46e;
}
```

Let's break that down. First is `body`, which tells the computer where the
style rules apply.
